Update EIP-3540: Claify, improve and fill missing sections of EOF EIPs (#9662)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7069.md

## Abstract

> Introduce three new call instructions, `EXTCALL`, `EXTDELEGATECALL` and `EXTSTATICCALL`, with simplified semantics. Introduce another instruction, `RETURNDATALOAD` for loading a word from return data into stack. Modify the behavior of `RETURNDATACOPY` instruction executed within EOF formatted code (as defined by [EIP-3540](./eip-3540.md)). The existing `*CALL` are rejected by EOF validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Introduce three new call instructions, `EXTCALL`, `EXTDELEGATECALL` and `EXTSTATICCALL`, with simplified semantics. Introduce another instruction, `RETURNDATALOAD` for loading a word from return data into stack. Modify the behavior of `RETURNDATACOPY` instruction executed within EOF formatted code (as defined by [EIP-3540](./eip-3540.md)). The existing `*CALL` instructions are rejected by EOF validation.
```

The new instructions do not allow specifying a gas limit, but rather rely on the "63/64th rule" ([EIP-150](./eip-150.md)) to limit gas. An important improvement is the rules around the "stipend" are simplified, and callers do not need to perform special calculation whether the value is sent or not. 

Furthermore, the obsolete functionality of specifying output buffer address is removed in favor of using `RETURNDATACOPY` instead. For cases which would previously `*CALL` output into a buffer and then `MLOAD` from the buffer, `RETURNDATALOAD` is provided instead.

Lastly, instead of returning a boolean for execution status, an extensible list of status codes is returned: `0` for success, `1` for revert, `2` for failure.

## Motivation

Observability of gas has been a problem for very long. The system of gas has been (and likely must be) flexible in adapting to changes to both how Ethereum is used as well as changes in underlying hardware.

Unfortunately, in many cases compromises or workarounds had to be made to avoid affecting call instructions negatively, mostly due to the complex semantics and expectations of them.

> This change removes gas observability from the new instructions and opening the door for new classes of contracts that are not affected by repricings. Furthermore, the legacy call instructions are rejected within EOF contracts, making sure they are mostly unaffected by changes in gas fees. Because these operations are required for removing gas observability they are required for EOF in lieu of the existing legacy instructions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This change removes gas observability from the new instructions and opens the door for new classes of contracts that are not affected by repricings. Furthermore, the legacy call instructions are rejected within EOF contracts, making sure they are mostly unaffected by changes in gas fees. Because these operations are required for removing gas observability they are required for EOF in lieu of the existing legacy instructions.
```

11. Perform the call with the available gas and configuration.
12. Push a status code on the stack:
    - `0` if the call was successful.

>     - `1` if the call has reverted (also can be pushed earlier in a light failure scenario described in step 10.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `1` if the call has reverted (also can be pushed earlier in a light failure scenario described in step 10).
```

>     - `2` if the call has failed. (In case of general OOG failure or any scenario where all gas passed to the callee is burnt in case of an error)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `2` if the call has failed (in case of general OOG failure or any scenario where all gas passed to the callee is burnt in case of an error).
```

13. Gas not used by the callee is returned to the caller.

Execution semantics of `RETURNDATALOAD`:

1. Charge `3` gas
2. Pop 1 item from the stack, to be referred to as `offset`
3. Push 1 item onto the stack, the 32-byte word read from the returndata buffer starting at `offset`.
4. If `offset + 32 > len(returndata buffer)`, the result is zero-padded.

Execution semantics of `RETURNDATACOPY` in EOF formatted code ([EIP-3540](./eip-3540.md)) is modified as follows:

> 1. Assume the 3 arguments popped from stack are `destOffset`, `offset` and `size`.

Reviewer 3: for points 1 and 2 here maybe mark it as "no change", to be explicit about where the semantics are modified?

### Status codes

> Current call instructions return a boolean value to signal success: 0 means failure, 1 means success. The Solidity compiler assumed this value is a boolean and thus uses the value as branch condition to status (`if iszero(status) { /* failure */ }`). This prevents us from introducing new status codes without breaking existing contracts. At the time of the design of [EIP-211](./eip-211.md) the idea of return a specific code for revert was discussed, but ultimately abandoned for the above reason.

Reviewer: Maybe move this to rationale or motivation?

Author: This is a part of Rational. I can change it to something saying that we considered also a version which does not change the meaning of 0 and 1 but the extensible version won.

Reviewer: Why remove this explainer then?

Author: Because it's not valid any longer. We do have 3 different return values for `EXT*CALL`s and one of them means that call was reverted.

Reviewer: How is it not valid? It explained why it wasn't changed in the past.

Author: misunderstood. reverted

We change the value from boolean to a status code, where `0` signals success and thus it will be possible to introduce more non-success codes in the future, if desired.

Status code `1` is used for both reverts coming from the callee frame and light failures encountered (see step 10. of Execution Semantics) in the execution of the instructions. The reason for combining them is keeping the semantics similar to the original CALLs - both scenarios preserve unused gas and continue being indistinguishable to the caller.

> Status code `2` is used for to signal exceptional failure in callee execution. Which means that an error which results in burning all gas occurred in callee frame.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Status code `2` signals an exceptional failure in the callee execution, meaning an error occurred that consumed all remaining gas in the callee frame.
```
